We're at this very specific and
important and fundamental and I think
profound turning point in technology
which is the rise of AI.
How do we explain this to people?
Because a lot of lots are going to
attack this. Do we want the US to be an
industrial superpower or not? These are
choices. These are policy choices. AI is
only happening in two places. It's only
US versus China. China's basically been
running the American system playbook.
But there's another turn on AI that's
coming, which is the turn to embodied
physical AI, which is robotics. There's
be billions, tens of billions, hundreds
of billions of robots of all shapes,
sizes, descriptions running around doing
all kinds of things. What we should do
is lean hard into the manufacturing jobs
of the future, which is designing and
building all of these new things. If you
don't do this, you're living in a world
of Chinese robots everywhere.
CEO and co-founder
[Music]
partner of DC.
A few weeks ago, I got a chance to
interview my friend Mark Andre at the
first annual Ronald Reagan Presidential
Library Economic Forum. This forum is a
competitor to Davos, the World Economic
Forum. It's a gathering of a lot of top
leaders who are interested in
capitalism, in markets, and American
dynamism and really has kind of a more
probuilder mindset than we see in
Europe. We had a great chat with Mark.
He's been really interested in US
economic history, studying Hamilton,
studying McKinley, his policies changed,
of course, uh, to be more reciprocal
from his original tariffs. And there's
some interesting questions today from
these people. You know, our economy we
talk about started off focused on
industrial economy, on manufacturing. It
shifted to a more of a services-based
economy with a lot of policy starting in
the 1960s and now today 60 years later
it's shifting again from manufacturing
to services and now to AI and energy. An
AIdriven economy looks very different
than a services economy. What are the
right policies on trade on immigration
on regulation? Mark's really bullish on
robotics and what that does especially
for rural areas versus city. What are we
going to see with productivity growth?
How do we make sure we share this wealth
we're creating the right way uh with
everyone? And so it lifts everyone up in
the United States. There's some really
interesting important policy questions
that are going to determine the future
of our country. And Mark Andre's the
right guy to talk to about it. Excited
for you to hear from him. Welcome to our
our first annual Reagan Economic Forum.
It's an honor to have you guys here. Um,
you know, we talk a lot here of course
about about Reagan's e economic pillars
and policies which include deregulation
and lower taxes and lower spending. Uh,
all of which are very relevant today.
But Mark, I want to start off asking you
about someone I know you've been reading
about and President Trump's been reading
about from a hundred years before, which
is which is William McKinley. And
William McKinley, of course, was a
staunch protectionist at first. Uh, and
and is this historical example of how to
revitalize American industry relevant
today? Is it relevant to everything
we're doing in AI and and energy? Like,
how do you think about this?
Yeah. So, I've been doing my best to
kind of spin up in the history of this.
And so there there was something in the
19th century uh actually originally
created by Alexander Hamilton uh when he
was Treasury Secretary called the
American system. Um and and and really
what what they and this is even you know
this is like 80 years before McKinley um
90 years before McKinley. Uh you know
what they were dealing with was the the
the the British Empire, right? The UK
was the pre-minent industrial power. You
know they were the first like giant
industrial power uh on on on planet
earth. Um and had built this, you know,
very commanding economic technological
military uh position. And of course,
America, you know, at the time of the
revolution was mostly farmland. Um, and
then there was this raging debate
between Hamilton and Jefferson as to
whether you'd want America to be an
industrial, you know, kind of urban
financialized power, which is what
Hamilton wanted, or of kind of a rural,
you know, kind of rural farming
aristocratic uh power, which is what
Jefferson wanted. And, you know, and
Hamilton won that debate. And so that
led to what was called the American
system. The American system led to, you
know, the creation of the United States
as an industrial power. that developed
over the course of the 19th century, but
it really took off at the tail end of
the 19th century and what was called the
was called the second industrial
revolution. And so between call it 1870,
1880 and like 1930, basically everything
we view today as the modern world um was
basically invented uh then and and like
you could almost look around the room
here today and you could say basically
every piece of physical infrastructure,
everything around us, you know,
literally everything, the airplane, um
you know, manufacturing techniques to be
able to make um uh to be able to make uh
you know, modern modern, you know,
glassware um at scale um air
conditioning um you television, radio,
uh you know, auto the automobiles we
drove to get here. Um you know, it it
all was uh the the result of the second
industrial revolution. And then the
McKinley presidency was right in the
middle of that of of that period. It's
really when the whole thing catalyzed.
Um and so it was really the point at
which America became the the the world's
industrial superpower. And then of
course that led to America being able to
become a huge player in both World War I
and World War II. you know, ultimately,
you know, you know, you know, winning
winning World War II and and and
becoming the uh you know, the arsenal of
democracy. It all kind of flowed out of
that period. And and so and and the and
the American system is something that
people really don't like to talk about
these days because it was heavily
protectionist. Um and the whole theory
of it was you you don't industrialize uh
just with like a single technology or a
single company. You industrialize by
having an entire ecosystem, right? You
industrialize by having, you know, not
just three car companies, but by having
all the thousands of part suppliers that
make all the parts for the cars. Um and
so the Brits had done this. They had run
a very uh heavily protectionist uh
program to be able to boot up the first
industrial re revolution in the UK. You
know, they then advocated for free trade
when exports became more important. Uh
McKinley was the inheritor of the
American system and so he was heavily
protectionist to build up the second
industrial revolution and then he
actually switched to become more of an
advocate for free trade because as
American exporters were becoming more
successful, they needed export. They
needed they needed foreign markets. Um
and then by the way um in the 20th
century basically every industrial
revolution in every other country that
has worked in the last h 100red years
basically follows that model as well. So
you know it's the same thing Germany
did. It's the same thing Japan did. It's
the same thing Korea did. It's the same
thing China uh is doing right now.
China's basically been running the
American system playbook um in China.
And so and then this this goes to tariff
policy and like and and and and I'm not
here to like make an argument like it's
like in favor of tariffs but more of
like a historical observation that there
has been this phenomenon over time that
if you want to have the kind of
clustering effect that leads to
industrial preeminence uh it is not
unusual uh to have you know a
combination of of of tools and you know
kind of tools and methods used to do
that. you know, it has been historically
characteristic that tariffs would be a
part of that. But it's also historically
characteristic that there there becomes
this point when you also therefore want
to go for exports and you want to go for
free trade. Um and and and McKinley
specifically, you know, he ran for
office very much on the idea of having a
high impermanent tariff. Once he was in
office, he switched more to a model of
what he what he called reciprocity. Uh
right. And and basically it was, you
know, we we start out by tariffing, but
the goal actually is to get everybody to
lower their tariffs. that that you know
the goal is to get a a world of much
more free trade and then therefore these
American exporters are able to to
succeed globally. Um and and of course
he was able he was able to use tariffs
as American tariffs as a lever to get
other countries to drop their tariffs.
And so in that sense what we're going
through right now in the US is is sort
of very characteristic of that. And what
makes maybe the whole thing you know
kind of more poignant is you know there
is this kind of fundamental underlying
question which is do we want the US to
be an industrial superpower or not?
Right? Right. And in the 19th century,
they were like completely clear that
they wanted that. And and in our time,
you know, I I think we're we're still
ambiguous about it.
It's interesting though because I mean,
and you've said this yourself in other
context, we had this manufacturing wave
and then in starting in the 1960s, uh
services really drove a lot of our
growth the last 60 years, which
obviously was not as tied to that. So
the elite maybe were not thinking about
these issues as much. And I guess the
question is today, are we shifting into
something else? Is it an AIdriven
economy? What is it? And you know, it
seems like Trump's camp's a little bit
split. You have really two visions. One
vision you'd say maybe more like the
Bannon side is more focused on reviving
traditional manufacturing through
tariffs, through industrial incentives.
Then you have the other side is more
about tech acceleration via AI, via
chips, via energy. So so how how do
these things play into I mean is are we
going to be able to copy the past or is
it a new policy here?
Yeah. So this this is I mean this is
sort of the central question I think. So
so my my read of the of the trajectory
basically is call it between 1870 and
1920 the US economy was heavily based on
industrialization. all the stuff I just
talked about. Um, by the way, uh, very
high immigration environment at the
time, very rapid rate of immigration and
then and then actually very high tariffs
and and and by the way, an annual growth
rate of, you know, something like 3x,
you know, the current growth rate, uh,
of the US, you know, with with a much
smaller population with with much with
with much less uh, fewer tools to work
with. Um, then there was sort of the
1920 to 1970 period where the growth
rate was maybe something like 2x uh, the
rate that we have now. Um and that was
and that was you know that was the space
race and rockets and electronics and you
know the beginning of the computer
industry and and you know you know went
quite well from an economic growth
standpoint. And then around the time I
was born around you know 1971 basically
the the US economy permanently
downshifted its growth rate. Um and and
both in terms of productivity growth
which of course measures technological
transformation in the economy as well as
as well as economic growth. And so you
know we went from like super high growth
to like high growth to low growth. that
low growth coincided with this shift,
right, with with all the shifts that
happened in the 1970s, you know, many of
which, you know, Reagan was a reaction
to, but you know, many of those shifts
happened and many of those shifts have
continued, you know, as you said, less
less less industrial uh uh enthusiasm,
more what they call, you know, services.
Um, you know, and by the way, the good
news of that transition is the
transition to knowledge work has worked
really well. And you know, we live and
work in places like Silicon Valley and
Austin and others that have done
phenomenally well because you've got all
these tech companies that are are global
exporters of technology and the AI
revolution is happening in the US, you
know, and it's absolutely tremendous.
But, you know, we we we you know, we
transformed the American economy to
basically have knowledge work on the
high end. Um, and then financialization,
um, you know, and and banking and
currency and and and being the the the
safe bond asset, um, on on the other
hand. And then we basically, you know,
we we we chose to de-industrialize,
right? Right. And we chose to
de-industrialize through a set of
explicit policy choices. You know, not
not least of which is, you know, we made
we made a lot of industrial activity
illegal um over time. Um and I would
argue, you know, number one, like that
formula has not first of all, it just
hasn't worked that well in terms of
growth, right? If if it doesn't pay off
in terms of productivity growth and
economic growth, like how is it actually
going? And of course, the the the
problem the irony of this is if if you
don't like populism, the way that you
get populism is slow growth, right?
because you because slow growth puts
everybody in the mind of of of zero sum,
right? Everything becomes a zero- sum,
you know, kind of fight for resources.
Um because people don't think that
there's a lot of opportunity in the
future.
Um and so, you know, we like the formula
that kind of all the smart people did,
you know, actually created the
preconditions for the sort of resurgence
of populism on both the left and the
right. Um and then the other kind of
really, you know, critical thing
happening right now that you see just
happening kind of everywhere in our
politics and society is this just giant
divide between the cities and the
countryside. And you know, I'm I'm I'm
sort of a weird example of this myself.
I grew up in rural Wisconsin um you
know, in what was sort of, you know,
originally farming and then sort of led
to industry, you know, kind of world. Um
and um uh and then, you know, and then
when I, you know, graduated college, I I
moved to California, I did a jump to,
you know, kind of the polar opposite
kind of culture, uh and kind of world.
Um and you know, of course, when I was
in Wisconsin, I was like, "Wow, that,
you know, those those smart people in
the coast must be must be so much better
and smarter than we And then I got I got
to the coast and I was like, "Wow, these
people on the coast really hate
everybody where I grew up." Um like this
is interesting. I I knew they didn't
like us. I didn't realize they despised
us quite to this degree. Um and so now
we have this like just like raging
cultural, social, economic disconnect
between the cities and the country in
the countryside which I you know I think
is quite dangerous.
Let's be controversial and dig into this
a little bit more on cities. So I think
a lot of us have noticed that our cities
are deeply dysfunctional. They're
they're broken in our society, right?
You have I think we have a candidate
who's like a socialist Islamist who's in
danger of taking over New York uh very
soon right now. And we we have we have
all sorts of problems. People can't
afford to have kids in cities the way
they're set up. Uh I think there's this
cost disease for everything. Like like
what went wrong? What's going on with
these cities and and what's what's an
optimistic take on it, Mark? How can we
fix this?
Yeah. So the guy the guy in New York is
interesting. uh and uh he's you know
kind of running slight slightly behind
Cuomo for New York mayor but he's
literally running a platform among other
things of having um city-owned uh
grocery stores right and so and so you
know the joke is you know he's
reinventing bread lines you know for the
21st century like you know really
tremendous tremendously tremendous
platform
um the uh Seattle is another case study
of this Seattle to give you a sense how
crazy things are the that the district
in Seattle the city council district
where the most Microsoft and Amazon
executives lived live uh elected a a
city council woman who's who ran a
platform of nationalizing Microsoft and
Amazon.
Um, right. And then, you know, in the
Bay Area, I've got, you know, a thou,
you know, I I live in I live in ground
zero of dysfunction and collapse. Um,
and I've got I've got I've got thousands
of stories uh from the Bay Area. Yeah.
So, like I think there's like a very
fundamental political economy thing
happening which which is which which
falls out of this sort of economic
transformation that's happened, this
policy transformation that's happened.
And so the there's a guy there's a
French there's actually a French writer
geographer who has I think the best
analysis on this um and who's written a
great book on it called Twilight of the
Elites. And what he basically observes
is if you look at all the western
countries through this process of sort
of de-industrialization and
financialization and techn you know sort
of technology knowledge work you know
becoming pre-minent at the high end of
the economy. you sort of have this
pattern where uh basically like in an
agricultural economy or in a
manufacturing economy, you kind of have
to spread everything out throughout the
country because like natural resources
really matter and energy really matters
and physical infrastructure matters and
access to, you know, trains and all
these things, you know, really rivers
and water and so forth really matters.
But if you're if you're going to replant
your the sort of commanding heights of
your economy on knowledge work, then
what you're going to do is you're going
to slam basically all economic growth
into the cities, right? Because you're
which is what what Silicon Valley has
done, right? So, you want all the
software developers in one place and and
you want them, you know, and they're
going to the good news is they're going
to eat at high-end restaurants and
they're going to employ a lot of
nannies, but like fundamentally they're
going to be sitting in conference rooms,
you know, designing software together.
Um, and and you want that to happen in a
single concentrated place. Um, and so
what happens is basically this the
cities become a magnet for basically two
kinds of people. One is sort of the
upper class, which is to say kind of the
you know highly educated elite in the
knowledgeable professions uh who make
enough money where they can afford to
buy, you know, $3 million houses. Um,
and then you've basically got the so
you've got basically like super
expensive homes and then you've got
public housing so-called public housing,
right? Council estates in the UK or
section 8 8HH or whatever it is housing
here um where you've got you know
basically public housing and so and then
and then the public housing is is is you
know is basically it's it's you know
it's you know people who are very low
paid kind of on the you know low end of
the service economy. Um and then and
then and then that's the city and and
then who's squeezed out of the city is
basically right the entire middle class
is squeezed out. And just to give you an
example of this in the Bay Area, if
you're a cop or a firefighter in the Bay
Area and you work in Palo Alto, you
commute three hours both ways. Uh just
to be able to like have a house and
afford a family, right? And then of
course you look what's happening in the
cities and like it's, you know, there's
there's like lots of dogs, there's very
few kids, right? And it's like, you
know, what on earth is that about? Well,
you you can't buy a house. You you can't
you can't you can't have a family. Um
you may not even own a car. Like how are
you going to get kids anywhere? But what
happens is from from a political
standpoint is the cities then are run,
right? They're in in in their local
democracies, it's these super high-end
kind of, you know, very progressive
elites. And then it's sort of the
clientele underclass, right? Um that um
you know, of you know, in the US it's
Hispanic immigrants or
African-Americans. You know, in Europe
it's it's you know, their you know,
their their other kind of clientele
underclass that they've developed in
places like Paris. Um and so you've got
this high plus you've got this kind of
old political kind of structure of of
you know, sort of top plus bottom, you
know, kind of configuration. What you've
done is you've squeezed the middle and
you've ejected the middle out of the
cities into the countryside, but you've
de-industrialized and so there's no new
economic activity happening in the
countryside uh for all the middle class
people to do.
This so far is not an optimistic panel,
Mark.
Sorry. Sorry.
Let me try to make it optimistic. Sorry.
Let me try to make it optimistic. Okay.
Let me try to make it optimistic. These
are choices. Like these are choices.
These are policy choices. Like sometimes
the way this stuff gets painted is that
these are just like impersonal economic
forces or technology forces. And of
course, you know, I get this a lot. like
you idiot don't you understand that like
you know it's it's just like you know
manufacturing is old fashioned we have
this all this new stuff we shouldn't eat
you know what what no these are choices
like there were specific choices made so
the classic choice the classic choice
that was made I'll be since the Reagan
library I'll beat I'll beat up on Nixon
um so Richard Nixon the year I was born
1971 he proposed something called
project independence uh he he actually
visionary visionary president he saw the
energy crisis coming um and he said it's
a national imperative to build a
thousand new nuclear power plants uh in
civilian nuclear power plants in US by
the year 2000 cut the entire US electric
grid over to nuclear,
right?
It would, by the way, would have gotten
us to electric cars, you know, probably
30, 40 years faster. Um, and would have
completely separated us from strategic
involvement in the in in the Middle East
for for for energy. Um, so that was the
good news. The bad news is he created
the EPA and the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, which then prevented Project
Independence from happening. And of
course, the no new nuclear power plants
got built. But that was a policy choice,
right? And and I'm sure that was not the
out that was not the result that he
intended, but that was a policy choice.
Um, and so you know, and and by the way,
a lot of this is happening right now in
Washington. Like there is an opportunity
to look at everything from nuclear
power, minerals, natural resources. I
was on a call this morning on natural
resources with very promising progress
being made. Um, you know, rare earth
metals, there's, you know, construction.
We we have a project to build a new city
um in California. Um, we've bought, you
know, four times the uh acreage of of
Manhattan uh in Solano County. Um, you
know, we have the opportunity to build
like entirely new cities in this
country. um you know we like there's any
number of things any number of these
policy decisions that we could make that
would cause revitalization.
So so we're going to fix better
policies. There's something else going
on though which I think you and I are
both very bullish on which is which is
this AI wave and AI services right and
so I think I think one thing that's very
interesting right now is obviously we
all know there's major cost disease in
our society. Healthcare is becoming more
and more unaffordable. We I think people
are talking about our $ 36 trillion
debt. It's actually $150 trillion more
if you include our healthcare promises.
Much bigger problem. uh you obviously
education, housing, all these things are
becoming less affordable but but you and
I have both seen that a lot of these new
technologies are going to turn some of
these services into much more affordable
products and I think we're making big
bets on that. Tell tell us about this.
So first of all just a moment on AI. So
you asked a question earlier which is
like is is there like there's a
traditionalist view of like we need to
go get the jobs that used to exist. We
need to somehow bring them back and and
you know and here you get into this
argument of like well you've got you
know Chinese laborers working for a
dollar an hour whatever like you're not
going to get those jobs back. It's just
not cost effective to bring those jobs
back. What we have though is we're at
this very specific and important and
fundamental and I think profound turning
point in technology which is the rise of
AI. Um and I would say that the good
news let's make the panel optimistic.
The good news is the US is like by far
the leader on AI. Now by the way we need
to decide whether we want to be the
leader in AI because there's like a lot
of forces in the US and in the US
government that are trying to prevent
that from happening. But
there's over a thousand laws at state
level we've been trying to fight and
stop that would screw this up. Right. So
there's a lot of people who are against
this. California state state state
government almost passed a law to outlaw
AI in California six months ago which is
an indication how crazy California is
but yes that we we it's like everything
else we can have it if we want it uh
these are all choice but like AI is
happening and AI is only happening in
two places like it's only US versus
China and there's a whole competition
thing there but like the US is like very
powerful on this and then by the way the
US is benefiting a lot because Europe
has basically made AI illegal like
they're regulating themselves to death
and so the smart AI people in Europe are
moving to the US um and so like the the
US really is ground zero for AI. Um,
today AI is software, right? And so when
you use AI, you use chat GPT. It's an
app on your phone, right? It it does
there's no manufacturing kind of
component, you know, really. You know,
people are building giant data centers,
but you know, it's not a huge generator
of like middle class jobs. Um, but
there's another turn on AI that's
coming, which is the turn to the turn to
embodied physical AI, which is robotics,
right? Um, and this is a transition that
has already happened. It's already
actually happened in drones, uh, where
drones went from being human piloted to
actually being auton, you know,
autonomously piloted. they now fly
themselves. Um, it's a transition that's
happening in cars right now, right?
Where cars went from, you know,
basically purely physical products to
now basically being rolling computers
that drive themselves. And if you if you
haven't tried this yet, if go to go to
if you ever have the misfortune of
finding yourself in San Francisco, take
away Mo. Um, it's amazing to live in a
cyberpunk future reality where you're in
literally a state-of-the-art
self-driving car that's literally out of
the Jetson's driving past people who are
dying of fentanyl overdoses on the
sidewalk. I recommend having the
experience at least once. Um but but the
self-driving car really does work. Like
it's really happening. And then what's
going to happen, you you've all probably
seen, you know, Elon has this Optimus
robot that he's building. Um these
humanoid robots, like the the the
general purpose robotics thing is going
to happen and it's going to happen in
the next decade and it's going to happen
at giant scale. And I I I think there's
a plausible argument which Elon also
believes that robotics is going to be
the biggest industry in the history of
the planet. It's just going to be
gigantic. There's going to be billions,
tens of billions, hundreds of billions
of robots of all shapes, sizes,
descriptions running around doing all
kinds of things. um those robots need to
get designed and built, right? And so my
view is, you know, we don't try to get
the old manufacturing jobs back. What we
try, what we should do is lean hard into
the manufacturing jobs of the future,
which is designing and building all of
these new things, right? By the way,
which includes drones and cars, right,
and robots. Um, and you know, we
shouldn't be building manufacturing
lines that have people sitting on a
rubber mat for 10 hours screwing screws
in by hand. But we should be building,
you know, what Elon calls, he calls
alien dreadnot factories, right? Which
is like these super sophisticated
factories with like tons of robotics.
But you can imagine thousands and
thousands of different categories of
industrial production that have to
happen all across the US in order to
make this happen. Um and and and would
cause just like enormous economic growth
throughout the country. We'd get a huge
payoff from all the tech investment that
that that that the coast are making. But
we generate many tens or hundreds of
millions of jobs um in the countryside
and then the US would would lead. It
would be, you know, be the third
industrial or fourth industrial
revolution. We would we would lead in
the development of all these new things.
And then you get to the national
security side of this which is if you
don't do this you're living in a world
of Chinese robots everywhere. Um and
that has you know very profound
consequences uh for let's just say yeah
profound
consequences. It's an important policy
point and I I want to ask I want to dig
into this a little bit more. A lot of I
was just in an interview up there like
aren't we going to destroy tens of
millions of jobs? Isn't AI scary? A lot
of people are very scared right now with
the disruption. I'm very excited about
the higher productivity because I see it
being disinflationary. I see it creating
more jobs. How how do we how do we if
assuming we're aligned how do we explain
this to people? How do we explain this
is actually a really good thing for the
country because a lot of letites are
going to attack this. They are going to
try to stop it.
Yeah. So the the lettuce the lett are
wrong. The neoletites are wrong. They're
wrong in the sense of like that for the
reason they've always been wrong which
is the reality is we have not in the
last 50 years been in an era of fast
productivity growth, technological
change. We've been an area of slow
productivity change, slow economic
growth. U AI if it works the way that
actually people either hope or fear that
it's going to work, it's going to cause
productivity growth to shoot up. That
will naturally accelerate uh economic
growth. Um, but look, if if it just
stays as software, then the result of
that is it's going to make the cities
much better off, right? It's gonna it's
going to make San Francisco and LA and
New York much better off and Austin much
better off, but it's still not going to
answer this question of what happens in
the countryside. Uh, to answer the
question of what happens in the
countryside, you need you need to get to
the next thing. You need you need to
make AI hardware as well as software.
And and and you're right back to that
same prescription of basically
re-industrializing the country. And
again, not reind not reindustrializing
the country on the stuff that has
already left, re-industrializing the
country based on all the things that
have to be invented and built. Um, and
it's just like we know I mean just like
I'm just like incredibly highly
confident that there's going to be these
giant industries of, you know,
computerized everything. AI powered all
kinds of hardware of all kinds of
shapes, sizes, to descriptions. You
know, you're finding a lot of that kind
of thing. I'm finding a lot of that kind
of thing. I mean, look, the entire
defense base has to get rebuilt around
this.
We're going to redo the manufacturing.
We're going to build roads and tunnels
and everything cheaper. It's going to be
exciting.
Yeah. And so so so this this is this is
the thing that this is the thing to do.
Like the to me the path like on this is
very clear because we we have to we have
to do we have to do this because it's
necessary for national security
standpoint. We have to do it because we
need it we need the economic growth. We
have to do it because we need an answer
for the entire population of the country
not just the cities. Um and um yeah and
we have to do it because if we don't do
it, China's going to do it and we don't
want to live in that world.
So I want to circle back to another
controversial topic which you know over
the last several decades you mentioned
this. We've kind of pursued
de-industrialization, financialization.
Uh we've also pursued mass immigration
and you know that the view from the tech
world has almost always been we need
more of the smartest people to come here
and build with us. A lot of my smartest
friends are immigrants and they've built
great things. Uh but at the same time
some of this mass immigration is really
affected the working class in certain
ways that's that's maybe not great. I
know your views have evolved on this
topic like what is the right immigration
policy and how does it tie into what
what you're seeing for the next few
decades.
Yeah. So separate you know the classic
split between so-called high skill and
lowkilled immigration. Um, so on the low
scale immigration side, it's it's it's
it's the it's the it's actually the the
a lot of the AI doomers kind of have
this split personality where they're
like AI is going to eliminate all the
jobs and we need to import another 100
million people from the third world as
fast as possible or we won't have any,
you know, so so so there's a bit of a
there's a bit of a a weird kind of
disconnect I think in the logic in the
logic on that. Um, you know, look, the
country went through this before, you
know, as I said earlier, the there was
very high immigration
between like 1870 and 1920. you know,
they closed the gates in 1925. Um, and
you know, look, 1925 to 1977, you could
argue it would have grown faster with
higher immigration, but they grew a lot
faster than we've grown, right? And so I
like I do think there is this like if if
you have advanced if you have AI, if you
have advanced high productivity growth,
if you have lots of robots running
around, you know, I do think there is a
question of exactly how much low-killed
labor you need in the country, which
which which bears on a lot of the the
immigration debates. Um, the high skill
immigration debate is is the one that's
coming. Um, and it's not really top of
mind right now, but it's the one that's
coming. And the reason it's coming is
because I mean, look, we, you know, we
need we need talent, of course, to build
all the AI, build all the robots, and do
all these things. And, and you see this
in, you know, the debates around the
universities, you know, with the move
that the administration is doing on on
foreign students and so forth. And
there's this kind of very one-sided
argument that's happening on that right
now, which is you kind of need a
limited, you know, you need limited high
skill immigration from the rest of the
world or you're not going to have like
the smart people building stuff here.
Um, and I would say, you know, look,
like Joe, you know, our portfolio at our
firm is like the United Nations. It's
founders from 100 countries. You know, I
I benefited enormously by working in a
place characterized by very high
highskilled immigration. Um, the the
thing that's really coming to roost
though is sort of this this fundamental
issue which kind of nobody wants to talk
about, but I've started to talk about
which is it's it's the intersection of
DEI and and immigration that has really
I think warped I think our perceptions
on high immigration over the last 50
years. um which basic and you and you
see this by the way in like this you
just you look at like the foreign
enrollment rates of the top universities
which went from you know like two or
three or 4% 50 years ago to whatever 27
or 30 or 50 years
Columbia's over half right now
70% or whatever it is and so there's
been this massive transformation in who
gets educated um and then there's been
this massive transformation of who gets
admitted through de through affirmative
action and then you know as we now know
at DEI um and and again this goes
straight to the political divide in the
country which is if you're a family you
know if you if you're a family if you're
parents of a kid where I grew up um and
you've got a smart kid um and you think
you're going to get them into you know a
top university in this country like you
are fooling yourself like there is no
chance right um because they've got
their well the top universities
basically the top universities have
basically admissions program that looks
like this it's like DEI for white people
um which is the donors and all the fake
sports right um and so a lot of fake
sports
like I have a friend who got into Yale
to play varsity croquet um which let me
just say is not a sport that we played a
lot in rural Wisconsin and then you've
got you DEI generally for for the other
groups and then you've got this you got
this immigration influx. Um and as a
consequence of that like it is nearly
impossible uh for somebody coming from
like a Midwestern or rural background or
southern background um to get into the
US. By the way, this doesn't just affect
white people. This also obviously now we
now see how it's affecting Jewish
people. Um it it but it actually also
affects African-Americans uh in a very
interesting way which is actually uh
both the universities and the corporate
employers are literally this is true.
They're literally they literally import
Africans so that they don't have to hire
African-Americans. Um because they they
they they still count as black. Um there
was a great story. The thing that woke
me up to this, there was a story in the
New York Times 20 years ago about
Harvard. This is a Harvard admits, you
know, black students, but which ones?
Back when the New York Times could talk
about these things honestly. Um and it
quoted actually Henry Lewis Gates and
Lonnie Guineer at the time uh at Harvard
Law School basically observing that
African-Americans were not benefiting
from affir affirmative action because
Harvard had figured out that they could
import Nigerians. Um right. And again,
it's just like, right, the Nigerians are
great. They're very smart. They're very
productive. It's fantastic. You know,
all other things being equal, you'd like
to have as many of them in your country.
But like is that really why we're doing,
you know, the set aside programs. Um,
and so like there is this really
fundamental question which is like what
level of untapped talent exists in this
country that a combination of DEI and
immigration have basically cut out of
the loop for the last 50 years. Um, and
how long can we have this, you know,
story to everybody in the Midwest and
the South that says, you know, sorry,
you're, you know, because of historical
oppression, your kids are so
This is this is the angry populism
people are worried about that's
affecting our politics.
Yeah. This is what I've really come to,
this is what I've really come to
appreciate from growing up in the one
place and now being in the other place,
which is if you if you're if you're in
the if you're in the center of the
country, you're just like, "Wow, these
people really hate me. They really hate
my kids. Like, they're really out to get
me." Um and and like that that that's
just such a toxic that's just such a
toxic dynamic like that that's a very a
very very bad thing for that to
continue. So I guess to finish on a more
positive note, we have all these
challenges you've outlined. No, it's
fair. I think in order to be optimistic,
you first have to say what are the
challenges and diagnose it and then say
what are the ways
here's here's an optimistic thing which
is we have talent in this country that
is like we have we have so many smart
people in this country who are not being
properly trained, properly educated and
properly employed. We really genuinely
do we have tons of smart kids running
around who have all kinds of potential
who have been completely cut out of
opportunity for the last 50 years.
So So we're going to have this wave of
productivity growth. It's going to be in
the real world with robotics. We're
going to start to build hopefully if we
get the policies right and it's going to
lift all these people up. What are the
bottlenecks or things in the way of
doing that? There's we have the amazing
secretary of energy here. Energy is
obviously a really key thing to get
right. Uh there's obviously the chips,
there's the critical minerals you
mentioned regulatory stuff is insane in
this country and needs to be fixed like
like what are the biggest ones you're
focused on and how are we going to get
those to a place we need that it ends up
with the optimistic outcome.
So I say yes those. So I mean the good
news on this is a lot of it's obvious
right the minute you look at it you're
just like well obviously we have to do
these things if you talk to anybody
built you know running businesses in any
of these sectors they'll they'll tell
you right off the right off the bat the
thing the things the things that need to
happen um and so I you know I think I
think you know and you know the current
administration I think is pretty devoted
to a lot of this um you know look the
other I would just say the other
positive thing that's happening um
there's this new book out called
abundance um from uh from Ezra Klene who
I would say I disagree with on
approximately zero of everything um but
I think this book is really good um and
I he and his co-author, you know,
outline, you know, they don't
necessarily have the policy
prescriptions I would outline, but they,
you know, they make this point of like
it's like like, you know, liberals used
to believe in building things, right?
Well, I mean, if you go all the way
back, like communists really believed in
building things, right? Like all like
Soviet iconography 100 years ago was all
like rockets and skyscrapers and cars
and motion and energy and it was all
amazing and they built all these huge
things and then, you know, liberals you
know up through I don't know up through
the 19 you know up until basically the
1970s you know really believed in they
really believed in building things. that
really believed in building the future.
Um, and so Ezra and and Derek Thompson
are trying to recapture that. And
there's and there's a bunch of, by the
way, there's a bunch of of of leaders of
that party in Washington that are now,
you know, pushing that quite hard. Um,
and so may maybe, you know, although it
seems hard to believe these days, but,
you know, there may be an opportunity
for some actual bipartisanship here.
And again, it makes it just makes sense.
If the country is growing faster, it's
going to be a happier health. It's going
to be a happier it's going to be a
fundamentally happier place because
people whoever whichever side of the
political spectrum you're on, there's
going to be
Reagan, Mr. Reagan say, there's going to
be a sense of optimism, right? There's
going to be a sense of morning in
America. There's going to be a sense of
opportunity. There's going to be the
sense that your kids are going to live
better lives than you do. Um, and and I
don't think that's a particularly
partisan view at the end of the day. And
I think there may be an opportunity to
maybe bridge the divide a bit.
And I want to dig a little tiny bit
deeper as we end into what that means
because for me, for example, I think
both of us see how healthcare doesn't
need to take up 20% of our GDP, right?
It's very obvious that AI can make these
things a half, a third the cost for
better outcomes. And yet every one of
our states in this country has very
powerful provider and payer lobbies and
has very powerful cartels that block
competition. And so if we want to go
build something with AI, we're not
allowed to right now. Like do you see
the left and the right tech working
together to fight these special
interests to actually fix the regulatory
state because it's not like the
administration could just do it, right?
We have it's going to take a lot of
effort. Like what does that coalition
look like of the of the of the good guys
against this kind of broken regulatory
cartel in all these industries? Is that
is that something we're going to all
have to fight?
Yeah. So the the way I think about this
is there's basically right three
components to the American dream, right?
There's house, you know, have a have a
house, have a house for your kids where
and you know kind of by definition this
goes back to the geographic lens. The
house needs to be like near a place
where there's like great job
opportunities, right? So it can't be a
house in the middle of nowhere. It has
to be a house where there's going to be
great jobs um and you know safe
environment and so forth. Um number one.
Number two is is is healthcare. You need
you know great healthcare for you and
your family. And then three is
education. You want to send your kids
kids to good schools. Um if you
disagregate sectors of the economy over
the last 25 years, what you find is
basically everything that technology
touches basically collapses in price. Um
and so television sets and you know
computer games and you know everything
you know anything with electronics in it
basically the the prices productivity
growth in those sectors has advanced
very fast. Product prices have have uh
have collapsed. Everything is is much
cheaper. Um but if you chart uh housing,
education and healthcare um the prices
of those things are skyrocketing, right?
And and we all we all you we all see
this. It's just the price of housing is
exploding, the price of education is
exploding, and the price of healthcare I
mean healthcare is 20% of the economy on
its way to 50%. Um and uh and so the the
prices are exploding and and and so it's
like okay what what makes healthare what
what makes those three components the
American dream have these exploding
prices? It's basically it's two things.
Number one is uh and these are
interrelated but number one is
technology is not really touching them
very much. that and you could say the
tech industry has done a bad job at
addressing housing and healthcare and
education or or you could say that you
know the industries have been resistant
to it. Uh but technology hasn't really
touched them that much which means that
they productivity growth hasn't happened
in them. Um and then the other thing is
they're heavily regulated. Um they're
they're heavily dominated by the
government. they're heavily regulated
and then in all three of those sectors
uh the government both restricts supply
right and so zoning laws and university
certifications and so forth right mean
that it's very hard to actually build
new of of those three things um and then
the government responds to the political
pressure caused by the rising prices by
subsidizing demand and of course if you
subsidize demand and fix supply you get
skyrocketing prices right and so every
time there's a housing cris you know
it's professional housing crisis in
California the answer always is
subsidies for home buyers which always
has the effect of driving prices up
further and making the problem worse,
right? Um and so so so like that that
that drives, you know, those are the
microeconomics of of what's happening.
Um I don't think there's easy answers on
this. I but I think the acknowledgement
that this is in fact what's happening.
And then I think the the peop I think
the people have to decide that they do
not want to live this way. I I I think
like or the marginal American voter
needs to decide. It's just look, it's
just not acceptable that if I can't
spend $3 million, I can't have a house
that's in a good neighborhood with a
good job attached to it. And it's just
not acceptable uh that a four-year
college degree is going to cost a
million dollars, which is which is what
it's on its way to doing. And it's just
not acceptable that like this
healthcare, you know, monster is running
out of control. Um and and so, you know,
it it you know, in many ways, like this
is like the fundamental, you know,
policy political question of our time,
you know, that kind of kind of needs to
be dealt with. Again, these issues
become much easier to deal with in a
high growth environment, right? Um and
in in an environment with very rapid
technological development. Um let me
give you the good news story on on
healthcare. Everybody talks about
healthcare. can't break these curves.
There's one area of healthcare that is
incredibly sophisticated,
technologically advanced, and the price
curve looks like Moore's law. The price
curve looks like video games. The price
curve is just a straight line down, and
the quality of the service has gone way
up. And and that's LASIC eye surgery,
right? And and the reason it's the
reason that's the case is because it's
it's outside the system. It's a
discretionary purchase paid for by the
consumer. Um, you know, and the the
Lasic Eye studios are in like strip
malls. Um, and they've got like, you
know, three people in like a super
advanced, you know, incredibly advanced
like laser eye machine. um and you go in
there and you get zapped and you have
perfect eyesight and it every year it
gets better and cheaper. Um and so
that's like an example of what happens
if you're able to touch these sectors
with technology and if you're able to
get them out from under all the
regulatory and government overhang and
so that that potential exists I think
throughout the system but but
fundamentally we have to decide we want
it and and fundamentally the population
of the country has to decide that it
wants it.
Well I'm optimistic more of the leaders
in the tech and government sector are
going to be on our side and push through
and fix these regulations and the
technology is going to get us there.
Awesome. Thank you, Mark, for being
here. Appreciate it.
Good. Thank you, everybody.